Summer 1994 UROP Evaluation / IAP and Spring 1995 UROP Proposal

This past summer I worked for Franklyn Turbak in the Mathematics and
Computation group at LCS on a project called MUSEME, a MUD-like
environment written in Scheme. The project idea was extremely vague at
the beginning of the summer, so we weren't completely sure what I'd be
doing at that point.

The first part of the summer was spent mostly trying out different
ideas with interfaces and protection mechanisms. The main difficulty
we faced was how to protect users in the system from other malevolent
users without having to create so many security checks that it become
unusable. We examined the ideas used by other MUDs, MOOs, and MUSEs,
but were disappointed because all of them were either (1) obviously
the wrong thing, or (2) not applicable to our system because of
fundamental design differences.

We eventually found an idea that we liked, and I spent the rest of the
summer implementing the MUD system on top of it. At the end of the
summer, I gave a presentation to the Mathematics and Computation group
about what we had done so far and where we intended to go from
there. The other members of the group gave us more ideas to work with
and pointed out a few problems for us to work on.



For IAP and spring, I would like to implement the changes that
Franklyn and I had discussed, and finally create a stable, working
system. As Franklyn has just left MIT to teach at Wellesley, I will be
working under Hal Abelson. Once we are satisfied with it, Hal wants
Franklyn and I to write a paper about it to be published in some
appropriate place.
